	Context

	This database contains 76 attributes, but all published experiments refer to using a subset of 14 of them. 
	In particular, the Cleveland database is the only one that has been used by ML researchers to
	this date. The "goal" field refers to the presence of heart disease in the patient. It is integer valued 
	from 0 (no presence) to 4.

Content

	Attribute Information:
		
		1.  age 

		2.  sex (1 = male; 0 = female)

		3.  (cp) chest pain type (4 values)
			-- Value 1: typical angina
			-- Value 2: atypical angina
			-- Value 3: non-anginal pain
			-- Value 4: asymptomatic
		
			Angina: 
				https://www.harringtonhospital.org/typical-and-atypical-angina-what-to-look-for/
			
			Typical Angina:
				 Typical angina (TA) is defined as substernal chest pain precipitated by 
				 physical exertion or emotional stress and relieved with rest or nitroglycerin.
				 Typical symptoms usually include chest, arm, or jaw pain described as dull, 
				 heavy, tight, or crushing.
		
			Atypical Angina:
			   	 Atypical pain is frequently defined as epigastric or back pain or pain that 
				 is described as burning, stabbing, or characteristic of indigestion. 	
				 Women may have more of a subtle presentation called atypical angina. 
				 For example, in one study of over 500 women who suffered a heart attack, 
				 71% had fatigue, 48% had sleep disturbances, 42% had shortness of breath, 
				 and 30% had chest discomfort in the month prior to the heart attack.

			Non-anginal pain/ Non-Cardiac chest pain:
				 Non-cardiac chest pain (NCCP) is a term used to describe chest pain that 
				 resembles heart pain (also called angina) in patients who do not have heart 
				 disease. The pain typically is felt behind the breast bone (sternum) and is 
				 described as oppressive, squeezing or pressure-like.
			
			Asymptomatic:
				 Asymptomatic means there are no symptoms. You are considered asymptomatic 
			   	 if you: Have recovered from an illness or condition and no longer have 
				 symptoms. Have an illness or condition (such as early stage high blood 
				 pressure or glaucoma) but do not have symptoms of it.
 
		4.  (trestbps) resting blood pressure(sbp):
				Optimal blood pressure typically is defined as 120 mm Hg systolic — which is 
				the pressure as your heart beats — over 80 mm Hg diastolic — which is the 
				pressure as your heart relaxes. For your resting heart rate, the target is 
				between 60 and 100 beats per minute (BPM).
				
				Context Recurrent stroke prevention guidelines suggest that larger reductions 
				in systolic blood pressure (SBP) are positively associated with a greater 
				reduction in the risk of recurrent stroke and define an SBP level of less 
				than 120 mm Hg as normal.
				
				The reality is that HBP is a condition that makes the heart work harder than 
				normal. And left untreated, it scars and damages your arteries and can lead 
				to heart attack, stroke, kidney failure, eye damage, heart failure and fatty 
				buildups in the arteries, called atherosclerosis.
		
				Blood Pressure By Age:
				
					Gender		Age		SBP		DBP
					Male		21-25		120.5		78.5
							26-30		119.5		76.5
							31-35		114.5		75.5
							36-40		120.5		75.5
							41-45		115.5		78.5
							46-50		119.5		80.5
							61-65		143.5		76.5
	
					Female		21-25		115.5		70.5
							26-30		113.5		71.5
							36-40		112.5		74.5
							41-45		116.5		73.5
							56-60		132.5		78.5
							61-65		130.5		77.5

		5.  (chol) serum cholestorol in mg/dl
				
				A serum cholesterol level is a measurement of certain elements in the blood, 
				including the amount of high- and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol 
			        (HDL and LDL) in a person's blood. Serum cholesterol levels also show 
				the amount of triglycerides present. Triglycerides are another lipid that 
				can be measured in the blood.

				Add your HDL and LDL cholesterol levels, plus 20 percent of your triglycerides, 
				to calculate your serum cholesterol levels. If you have an LDL of 150 mg/dL, 
				HDL of 35 mg/dL, and triglycerides of 180 mg/dL, your serum cholesterol would 
				be 221 mg/dL. That’s considered a borderline high level. Your doctor would see 
				that number as a warning sign and work with you on making changes that will 
				bring your numbers down.
				
				** You are healthy if your serum cholesterol is less than 200 mg/dL.
				
				Your body needs cholesterol to build healthy cells, but high levels of 
				cholesterol can increase your risk of heart disease. With high cholesterol, 
				you can develop fatty deposits in your blood vessels. Eventually, these 
				deposits grow, making it difficult for enough blood to flow through your 
				arteries.

		6.  (fbs) fasting blood sugar > 120 mg/dl (blood sugar > 120 mg/dl-->true && 1 = true; 0 = false)
				
				Over time, high blood glucose from diabetes can damage your blood vessels and 
				the nerves that control your heart and blood vessels. The longer you have 
				diabetes, the higher the chances that you will develop heart disease. 
				People with diabetes tend to develop heart disease at a younger age than 
				people without diabetes.

		7.  (restecg) resting electrocardiographic results (values 0,1,2)
			-- Value 0: normal
			-- Value 1: having ST-T wave abnormality (T wave inversions and/or ST elevation or depression of > 0.05 mV)
			-- Value 2: left ventricular hyperthrophy
			
				Electrocardiography is the process of producing an electrocardiogram 
			        (ECG or EKG). It is a graph of voltage versus time of the electrical activity 
				of the heart using electrodes placed on the skin.

							

		8.  (thalach) maximum heart rate achieved

				A normal resting heart rate for adults ranges from 60 to 100 beats per minute. Generally, a 
				lower heart rate at rest implies more efficient heart function and better cardiovascular fitness. 
				For example, a well-trained athlete might have a normal resting heart rate closer to 40 beats 
				per minute.

				Heart rates that are consistently above 100, even when the patient is sitting quietly, can sometimes 
				be caused by an abnormal heart rhythm. A high heart rate can also mean the heart muscle is 
				weakened by a virus or some other problem that forces it to beat more often to pump enough 
				blood to the rest of the body.

				A very high or very low heart rate may reveal your risk for heart attack. For most people, a heart 
				rate that's consistently above 100 beats per minute or below 60 beats per minute for nonathletes 
				should prompt a visit to a doctor for a heart health evaluation.

		9.  (exang) exercise induced angina
				
				0-->No, 
				1--> Yes.
				Stable angina is usually triggered by physical activity. When you climb stairs, exercise or walk, 
				your heart demands more blood, but narrowed arteries slow down blood flow.

				Angina is a type of pain that occurs when not enough blood flows to the heart muscle. Angina may 
				feel like pressure in the chest, jaw or arm. It frequently may occur with exercise or stress. Some 
				people with angina also report feeling lightheaded, overly tired, short of breath or nauseated.

				Even though exercise can bring on angina, a supervised program of exercise can safely strengthen 
				the heart and eventually reduce angina. Start slowly, and gradually build up your level of exercise 
				during optimal times of the day. Your physician can tell you what you can and cannot do. 
				Heart-healthy eating.
		
				Exercise can also reduce the risk of your angina getting worse, and of a heart attack or stroke, 
				as well as helping to manage your weight and reduce your risk of back pain.


		10. (oldpeak) ST depression induced by exercise relative to rest
				
				

		11. (slope) the slope of the peak exercise ST segment
			-- Value 1: upsloping
			-- Value 2: flat
			-- Value 3: downsloping

				Upsloping:
				
					 Upsloping ST depression in resting electrocardiogram may indicate cardiac ischemia in 
					 the presence of active cardiac symptoms. In the absence of ongoing symptoms however, it 
					 may be secondary to conditions other than ischemia.

				Flat:
					It is often a sign of myocardial ischemia, of which coronary insufficiency is a major cause. 
					Other ischemic heart diseases causing ST depression include: Subendocardial ischemia or even 
					infarction. Subendocardial means non full thickness ischemia. In contrast, ST elevation is 
					transmural (or full thickness) ischemia.

					Myocardial ischemia, also called cardiac ischemia, reduces the heart muscle's ability to 
				        pump blood. A sudden, severe blockage of one of the heart's artery can lead to a heart 
					attack. Myocardial ischemia might also cause serious abnormal heart rhythms.
				
				Downsloping:
		
					Exercise-induced downsloping ST-segment depression is a common manifestation of severe 
					myocardial ischemia. Although greater downsloping ST-segment depression is suspected to 
					indicate more severe ischemia, its exact relationship to regional myocardial blood flow 
					(RMBF) has not yet been clarified.


		12. (ca) number of major vessels (0-3) colored by flourosopy

		13. (thal) : 3 = normal; 6 = fixed defect; 7 = reversable defect Thallium test
			   
				1---->good (means blood flow is good into your heart)
				0---->bad  (means blood flow is not good into your heart)

		14. (target) diagnosis of heart disease (angiographic disease status)
			-- Value 0: < 50% diameter narrowing
			-- Value 1: > 50% diameter narrowing
		

		The names and social security numbers of the patients were recently removed from the database, replaced 
		with dummy values. One file has been "processed", that one containing the Cleveland database. All four 
		unprocessed files also exist in this directory.

		To see Test Costs (donated by Peter Turney), please see the folder "Costs"


Acknowledgements

	Creators:
		
		1. Hungarian Institute of Cardiology. Budapest: Andras Janosi, M.D.
		2. University Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland: William Steinbrunn, M.D.
		3. University Hospital, Basel, Switzerland: Matthias Pfisterer, M.D.
		4  V.A. Medical Center, Long Beach and Cleveland Clinic Foundation: Robert Detrano, M.D., Ph.D.









# # # Notes:---------

A value of zero does not make sense and thus indicates missing value
Following columns or variables have an invalid zero value:

1.  cp
2.  fbs
3.  restecg
4.  exang
5.  exang
6.  oldpeak
7.  slope
8.  ca
9.  thal
10. target
